# Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project README #
## Prepared by Zach (wfio@github) ##

### Overview ###

 The purpose of this script is to provide a tidy data output for later review 
 and analysis. The script uses a functional programming as well as a split-comb
 ine and apply approach for ingesting untidy data, manipulating individual elem
 ments within the dataset and finally preparing the dataset via merging for lat-
 er review and analysis.
 
 #### Accessing the files ###
 
 The files you need to download to run this script are located at:
  [External Link](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip)
 
### Script Generation Environment & Techniques ###

 The script was prepared in a Windows 7 32-bit environment and crafted using 
 RStudio v0.98.1103 running on R-base version 3.20.0. The only non-generic pack-
 age used to complete this script is the Hadley Wickham 'dplyr' package. The pa-
 ckage version used for this assignment was 0.4.1.
 
 ### What to expect from the script and output ###
 
 The parent function (run_analysis) calls other functions within the script
 to process each phase of the data manipuation exercise. Initially, the fun-
 ction works on two different datasets (test & training) preparing them for gr-
 ouping, merging and final summary stat generation in the final_dataset() def.
 
 The script was fully commented using Google's R Style Guide, which is why I wi-
 ll spare you the rambling of walking you through my code in the README. The sc-
 ipt is fully commented and it should be transparent. Here's Google's stuff:
 
    [Google R Style Guide](https://google-styleguide.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/Rguide.xml)
 
 The function will print the final results to console while generatating a .txt 
 file called "run_analysis_tidy_data.txt". To view the output text file please 
 consider the following command in your R console:
 
    *your_var <- read.table(file_path, header = TRUE)*
      *View(your_var)* 
      
  If you're using RStudio, otherwise print() to your console.
  
  ### Preparing the dataset in *your* environment for running the script
  
  1. Download the dataset *.zip file to your PC and extract to a directory on 
  your harddrive.
    1.1. There will be a parent directory /UCI HAR Dataset followed by:
     1.1.2 /test directory, three text files and an Inertia sub-dir.
     1.1.3 /training directory, three text files and an Inertia sub-dir.
     1.1.4 /four text files that were used to prepare variable, measurement na-
     mes/details and a README.
  2. Save the run_analysis.R script into the /UCI HAR Dataset directory.
  3. Set your working directory as: *setwd("file_path_of_UCI_HART_Dataset")*.
    3.1 Verify your working directory: *getwd()*
    3.2 Verify the files from above were loaded: *list.files()*
  4. The script requires the 'dplyr' package. If you do not have it installed, 
  please perform: *install.packages("dplyr")* from your console. The dependenc-
  ies and other requirements of the package should be reviewed before proceeding
  by reviewing the package description at:
  
    [dplyr](http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/dplyr/index.html)
  
  5. Once all of the above are complete, please open the script utilizing the
  source function: *source("file_path")*.
  6. This will load the R script executable code into the console.
  7. Type *run_analysis()* and R will execute the code, print the results to
  the console and then write a text file into the working directory.
  
  If you run into any trouble, please, e-mail dev@wayfaring.io before reducing
  the score of any particular set. I'd be happy to walk you through the steps.
 
### Generation of the Codebook ###

  The codebook was generated by a combination of leveraging pre-existing info about
  the dataset from the 'features_info.txt' file in the collection of files and
  describing the transformations that occurred through the exercise. Please ref-
  erence that file for a full background on the features.
  
  The variables all have a single-character prefix, 't' or 'f', 'time domain' or
  'frequency domain signals', respectively and originated from two sensors:
  
  - Accelerometer
  - Gyroscope
  
  and were used to create measures that could would be recorded for various act-
  vities. Time domain is measured in seconds whereas frequency in Hertz (Hz). 
  The measures created were:
  
    -tBodyAcc-XYZ
    -tGravityAcc-XYZ
    -tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
    -tBodyGyro-XYZ
    -tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
    -tBodyAccMag
    -tGravityAccMag
    -tBodyAccJerkMag
    -tBodyGyroMag
    -tBodyGyroJerkMag
    -fBodyAcc-XYZ
    -fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
    -fBodyGyro-XYZ
    -fBodyAccMag
    -fBodyAccJerkMag
    -fBodyGyroMag
    -fBodyGyroJerkMag
    
    Each measure was collected for the following tasks:
    
    -WALKING
    -WALKING_UPSTAIRS
    -WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS
    -SITTING
    -STANDING
    -LAYING
    
    And the following summary statistics were generated:
    
    -mean(): Mean value
    -std(): Standard deviation
    -mad(): Median absolute deviation 
    -max(): Largest value in array
    -min(): Smallest value in array
    -sma(): Signal magnitude area
    -energy(): Energy measure. Sum of the squares divided by the number of values. 
    -iqr(): Interquartile range 
    -entropy(): Signal entropy
    -arCoeff(): Autorregresion coefficients with Burg order equal to 4
    -correlation(): correlation coefficient between two signals
    -maxInds(): index of the frequency component with largest magnitude
    -meanFreq(): Weighted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency
    -skewness(): skewness of the frequency domain signal 
    -kurtosis(): kurtosis of the frequency domain signal 
    -bandsEnergy(): Energy of a frequency interval within the 64 bins of the FFT of each window.
    -angle(): Angle between to vectors.
    
    The summary statistcs are appended to each variable name. For example, 
    *tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Y* would be translated as:
    
    - time domain
    - body jerk
    - gyroscope sensor (X, Y, Z axial measurements available)
    - standard deviation of Y-axial signal from the gyroscope sensor
